[RFC 0134] Carve out a store-only Nix (#134)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0134-nix-store-layer.md

---
feature: nix-store-layer
start-date: 2022-09-06
author: John Ericson
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)

> shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
> shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)

Reviewer: Thanks to the nominees for accepting! Here's the team the Steering Committee has decided on :)
```suggestion
shepherd-team: edolstra, infinisil, tomberek, L-as, andir
shepherd-leader: edolstra
```

Author: Hooray!

There are also many possible ways set up build farms.
Our current model of a central dispatcher, many remote-builder agents, and a client–server where only one side initiates, is also just one point in a much larger design space of possible solutions.

The "derivation language" and store *interface* however, seems to me at least to be a very natural design.
There are a few tweaks and generalizations we can make, but I struggle to envision what wildly different alternatives one might want instead.

A small, stable interface that allows for design exploration above and below it is known as a [narrow waist](https://www.oilshell.org/cross-ref.html?tag=narrow-waist#narrow-waist).
It's not every day that a project happens upon a great narrow waist design.
I believe we've discovered a very good one with Nix, and that should be seen as a *key asset*, even if it is not how we recruit "regular users".

By making a store-only Nix, we put more emphasis on this key interface.
All functionality the store-only Nix offers factors through this interface.
The upper half of Nix likewise uses the lower half through this interface.

> The daemon protocol represents this interface for IPC, and allows either half to be swapped for a different implementation.

Reviewer 2: So will the daemon protocol need to be standardized as part of this work? it seems to me that it wouldn't make sense to have a defined external executable without a defined way to talk to it (in the long run). The answer could be to link against `libnixstore` and use that to communicate with the (same version of) the store daemon. Is that so?

Author: @andir We do have a *defined* deamon protocol, in that you could implement it yourself instead of using `libnixstore` and it is versioned. Yes, it is a not nice, but I don't think improving the situation should be a blocker on this PR.

Rather, I think this PR will help make this sort of thing more noticeable, allowing us to build momentum / community interest about improving the daemon protocol. I think that's great!

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I don't mean this PR should implement it. It is just that the protocol might currently be defined but not documented or carries any guarantees. It has been subtly broken several times and (as you know) it isn't currently being tested across a broad set of nix versions.

I already implemted it (several times in fact) but the protocol isn't fun to reverse engineer from the current code base. My big hope is that with this RFC passing we could move to another RFC that defines a (new) interface that doesn't just allow exchanging implementations but embraces it.

Reviewer 3: > I already implemted it (several times in fact) but the protocol isn't fun to reverse engineer from the current code base.

Might you be interested in documenting these fruits of your protocol-reverse-engineering labors?

- [go-nix](https://github.com/nix-community/go-nix) is a new implementation of the store layer.

First of all, the fact that they are planning on two completely separate implementation oriented around this same "narrow waist" is testament to the appeal of the design.

Second of all, note that they have separate, orthogonal experiments they wish to run on both sides of the store interface divide.
Above, they want to experiment with radically different evaluation strategies, especially to speed up Nixpkgs evaluation.
Below, they want to experiment with the standardized containerization technologies that already exist for new ways of sandboxing and distributing builds with less bespoke Nix-specific code.
They also want to apply the layering paradigm *within* go-nix, fostering even more modularity.

I think these are great goals, and for the sake of the ecosystem as a whole, it should be as easy as possible to run such new experiments.
In particular, a novel evaluator should be usable with the standard C++ Nix store layer, and a novel store layer should be reusable with the standard C++ Nix evaluator.

> Yes, strictly speaking, we only need a stable daemon protocol to accommodate that goal, which we have.

Reviewer: I don't think this is a given. I seem to recall @edolstra stating that he does not want to guarantee interoperability between Nix versions[citation needed]. I think people disagreed on this and I'm not sure if they changed his mind, but it would be good to have a clear statement on this -- perhaps we could _make it true_ as part of the RFC?

The choice of language is just the tip of the iceberg here.
More profoundly, they also have a more "library" than "interpreter" model where packages depend on Guix as a library, which talks to a small rump daemon.
Guile sits far lower in their stack than the Nix language interpreter does; it is as if we rewrote some of our C++ into Nix language code, and Nix language code could do enough side effects to make that possible.

The point of this discursion is to show that not only are radically different implementation of the same specification possible on either side of the store interface (what Tvix + go-nix aim for), but also radically different designs not at all trying to be compatible.

All that said, below the store layer there is no difference in vision.
Because our communities are so separate, it would be easy to come up with diverging versions of how derivations, store objects, etc. should work.
That we have not done so I think is testament to the broad applicability of the Nix store design to many diverse groups of people with diverse goals.

> What I hope to do with Guix, then, is convene both projects to make their store store layers interoperate.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
What I hope to do with Guix, then, is convene both projects to make their store layers interoperate.
```

> Complementing the idea of a "marketplace of ideas" is when there is a certain design (like the Nix store layer), that is so broadly popular as to be a sort of "natural monopoly", that we should foster the most expansive and general idea of it as an exercise in coalition building and outreach.

Reviewer: I find this sentence hard to understand, I think it tries to make too many points at once.

Author: How's this?
```suggestion
Complementing the idea of a "marketplace of ideas" is when there is a certain design (like the Nix store layer), that is so broadly popular as to be a sort of "natural monopoly".
Rather than keep that designed "bundled" with more opinionated ideas (like the rest of Nix), we should foster the most expansive and general idea of the broadly popular idea as an exercise in outreach to other communities and coalition building with them.
```

I do not expect Guix to be immediately sold on this plan, but as that larger project, I think it behooves us to take the first steps to build trust and coordination.
Making a stand-alone Nix store executable demonstrates we are serious about layering and serious about standardizing that layer, and not just trying to get Guix users to use Nix instead.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

The goals motivated above a broken down into small steps that we can execute in isolation.
This keeps the cost of this work initially lower, and generally reduces risk.

## 1. The split itself

Allow building a store-only version of Nix.
This is a Nix executable that links `libstore` but not `libfetchers`, or `libexpr`.
Plenty of commands like `nix daemon`, `nix log`, and the `nix store` sub-commands don't care about evaluation, fetching, or Flakes at all.
[NixOS/nix#6182](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/6182) implements this, splitting `libcmd` into two parts so the CLI code is reused.

> We will finish it off with as many commands as are reasonable to include, and merge it.

Reviewer: Can we move the store-only parts of Nix into a separate drv output where non-dependency on the "full" output is enforced?

Author: Right now it would just be a separate derivation, but it would be nice to try to build both where possible.

Separate outputs might play funny with NixOS but I think we can. We can also just build libraries and exes in separate derivations.

Initially, we can test this store-only version of Nix with no changes to the test suite, by running full Nix with the store-only Nix's daemon.
Support for testing Nix against a separately-built daemon already exists and is in use today.

The store-only Nix and its tests should be built as part of CI, as "first class" as our existing CI jobs.

> That means both in the channel-blocking Hydra evaluation, and for each pull request.

Reviewer: Can we use the store-only Nix as the for NixOS's Nix daemon, and run Nix's daemon tests against a store-only-built daemon? Once we have the layering, I see no reason not to use only the necessary parts wherever possible.

If we hit the limits of GitHub Actions in per-pull-request CI, we should consider using Hydra either instead or in addition to GitHub Actions, something that has already been discussed.

## 2. Manual

> It should be possible to build a store-only manual without information on the other layers, too.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It should be possible to build a store-only manual without information on the other layers, too.
```
It should be possible, but not necessary for us to implement, build, host, etc.

This would be the manual that is distributed with the store-only Nix.
Of course, store-only and full Nix can share sections, so we aren't duplicating work.

## 3. Website

> The full and store-only version of Nix should both be presented for download on the website.

Reviewer 2: What exactly do you mean by presented? Provided as binaries or discussed/explained/promoted?

Author: Yeah, provided downloads and discuss/explain what they are, but not necessary promote.

I am not going as far as saying they should be given equal billing. It's OK if users just download the entire Nix and aren't forced to learn about the layering. We can revisit that later if this is a success :).

In particular, lower level commands can be used with higher level "installables" (arguments), so e.g.
```
nix show-derivation flake#bar
```
will still work.

## Good tasks anyways!

Lots of the plan above I think is good work we should be doing anyways, regardless of whether we expose a store-only Nix.
If you believe this, then the "cost" of this RFC is a lot less.

### Tests

Splitting the test suite per natural layer of the implementation is good work because it combines the specificity of unit tests with the real-world-ness of integration tests.
"Entire kitchen sink" tests make it harder to narrow down root causes of failures.

### Manual

The documentation team is already working to clean up the manual, and this effort already involves emphasizing layering.
So whether we formally make a store-only Nix or not, I suspect the overhauled manual will natural have easy boundaries from which to "extract" the store-only manual.

## Security

The daemon is a privileged process.
Even if with upcoming changes it shouldn't need root, it does tasks like administrating OS sandboxes correctly which still are security-critical.

> Having less code in the story-only Nix daemon, even if we think the removed code was "dead anyways" is always good.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
Having less code in the store-only Nix daemon, even if we think the removed code was "dead anyways" is always good.
```

Above, they want to experiment with radically different evaluation strategies, especially to speed up Nixpkgs evaluation.
Below, they want to experiment with the standardized containerization technologies that already exist for new ways of sandboxing and distributing builds with less bespoke Nix-specific code.
They also want to apply the layering paradigm *within* go-nix, fostering even more modularity.

I think these are great goals, and for the sake of the ecosystem as a whole, it should be as easy as possible to run such new experiments.
In particular, a novel evaluator should be usable with the standard C++ Nix store layer, and a novel store layer should be reusable with the standard C++ Nix evaluator.

Yes, strictly speaking, we only need a stable daemon protocol to accommodate that goal, which we have.
But ensuring the C++ Nix components can be built separately for use in isolation further send the message that such experimentation is *good* and *welcomed*.
Messaging matters, and making our layered architecture "official" as this RFC proposes I think sends a better message.

> ### Guix

Reviewer 5: Guix is not conceptional compatible on the store layer level with Nix. They support having scheme expression that are executed at build-time in their derivation files.

Reviewer 6: Depends how they've integrated that, how that scheme is defined and whether that's inconsistent with any `system` value we've used in Nix.
I couldn't find anything obvious about this in the Guix manual. Do you have a link to this info?

Reviewer 5: https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/G_002dExpressions.html

Author: @Mic92 No that is just them swapping out scheme for bash.

https://guix.gnu.org/en/blog/2023/dissecting-guix-part-1-derivations/ is not entirely clear, but shows that the drv format is not affected by g-expressions.

---
feature: nix-store-layer
start-date: 2022-09-06
author: John Ericson
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow building a Nix executable with just the store layer.
Do this to manage complexity, and promote a "Greater Nix" community.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Managing complexity

We have recently added a ton of functionality to Nix.
Most of this is in Flakes, which just has enormous surface area, but things like floating content-addressed derivations and other RFCs add complexity to the core store layer too.

If we view Nix as one monolithic whole, it will grow too complex and unwieldy, and we will be unable to manage it as we the complexity bogs us down.
However, if we embrace layering we can "divide and conquer" the project, and manage that complexity.
This will ensure the continued sustainability of Nix.

> We currently embrace layering somewhat as an implementation detail, but only as an implementation detail.

Author: ```suggestion
We currently care about layering enough to partition the implementation into separate `libnix*` libraries, but this is only an implementation detail.
```
how this?

> We currently embrace layering somewhat as an implementation detail, but only as an implementation detail.

Reviewer 7: Yes. (Although I would prefer to phrase it as separation of concerns instead of layering, but that may be me having Heard- and read "layering" way too often.)

The division between `libnixstore`, `libfetchers`, `libexpr`, etc. is not yet exposed to users, emphasized in documentation (though this is changing thanks to @Fricklerhandwerk's efforts with new [architecture documentation](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/6888)!).

We should instead fully embrace it:

- Docs

  - More advanced documentation can explain layering for those that want a deeper understanding of Nix.

  - Even more basic documentation can still benefit from separate terminology before the layering is fully explained.

>     See https://www.haskellforall.com/2022/08/stop-calling-everything-nix.html for a phenomenal take-down of how calling everything "Nix" today confuses users and leaves them unable to articulate what parts of the ecosystem are frustrating then.

Reviewer 8: Is it «frustrating then» or «frustrating when» or «frustrating them»?

Reviewer 9: I would just use frustrating,
```suggestion
    See https://www.haskellforall.com/2022/08/stop-calling-everything-nix.html for a phenomenal take-down of how calling everything "Nix" today confuses users and leaves them unable to articulate what parts of the ecosystem are frustrating.
```

> - Separate executable ensure lower layers build in isolation, new integration tests those executable without aid of high-layer info.

Reviewer: I'm having difficulty parsing this, maybe this sentence could do with a rewrite.

Author: How's this?
```suggestion
- Separate executables to ensure lower layers build in isolation without higher layers,

   - Integration tests for those executables that also don't use the higher layers to ensure those executables work in isolation. 
```
Frankly this is somewhat a restatement of the detailed design so I would be fine cutting it too,

### Starting with the store layer

Ultimately, I would like to take this approach to all the layers.
But I want to constrain the scope of this RFC to keep it tight an actionable.

Layering between e.g. Flakes and the Nix Language doesn't yet exist in the implementation in the form of a library separation.

> I don't want to be "blocked" on major new development work, and anything involving Flakes is also far more controversial, and best avoided at first.

Author: Oh i mean blocked on *self-imposed* work to separate these parts, not blocked on other stuff going on. (This wasn't meant to be a snarky comment Flakes or anything.)

```suggestion
Separating Flakes into its own library would require major new development work, and I don't want to "block" exposing the layering for the first time to users on such work when there is an easier way to try this idea how.
Flakes also has more development going on due to its unstable nature, so it is nice to get out of the way of that.
```

Conversely, the store layer is already quite well separated.

> The orthogonality between it and other layers "proven" in the wild by projects like Guix (more on that latter part in the next section).

Author: ```suggestion
Its conceptual independence from Nix's other layers is "proven" in the wild by projects like Guix.
```

The gap is also widest in terms of the layer of abstraction between, on one hand, nascent "infrastructure projects" like

- CA derivations
- Secrets in the store
- Trustless remote building
- Daemon and Hydra protocol rationalization
- Windows Support
- Computed derivations (which are built by the other derivations)
- IPFS store

etc. and "UX projects" like

- Flakes
- TOML Flakes
- Hard-wired module system

So focusing on the lowest layer first, we get the most "bang for buck" in terms of managing extremely different sorts of work separately.

## Marketplace of Ideas

As Nix grows more popularity, it will be inevitable that different groups want to explore in different directions.
This is the *pluralism* of a larger community, and we should embrace it as a strength.
We do that be fostering a *marketplace of ideas*.

> There are many possible ways in which to write down packages, The Nix language and Nixpkgs idioms, and Guix, for example, are just two points in a much larger space.

Author: ```suggestion
There are many possible ways in which to declare packages: the Nix language and Nixpkgs idioms, and Guix, for example, are just two examples of what is possible in principle.
```

There are also many possible ways set up build farms.

> Our current central dispatcher, many remote-builder agents model, point-to-point protocol model is also just point in a much larger design space.

Author: ```suggestion
Our current model of a central dispatcher, many remote-builder agents, and a client–server where only one side initiates, is also just one point in a much larger design space of possible solutions.
```

> The "derivation language" and store *interface* however, seems to me at least to be a very natural design.

Reviewer: By derivation language, you mean the ATerm-based language that drv files are written in?

Author: The abstract syntax of that. Basically "a derivation is an execve system call arguments, input black box data, and input other drvs' outputs". I think that right there is a very natural design.

There are a few tweaks and generalizations we can make, but I struggle to envision what wildly different alternatives one might want instead.

An stable, small interface that fosters lots of design exploration above and below is known from networking as a *narrow waist*.
The oil shell blog as a [great post](https://www.oilshell.org/blog/2022/02/diagrams.html) with more details on the concept.
It's not every day that a project happens upon a great narrow waist design, but I believe we've discovered a very good one with Nix, and that should be seen as a *key asset*, even if it is not how we recruit "regular users".

By making a store-only Nix, we put more emphasis on this key interface.
All functionality the store-only Nix offers factors through this interface.
The upper half of Nix likewise uses the lower half through this interface.
The daemon protocol represents this interface for IPC, and allows either half to be swapped for a different implementation.

To help explain the community-building benefits, it might help to go over some specific examples.

### Tvix and go-nix

> In https://tvl.fyi/blog/rewriting-nix, TVL announced that, frustrated in trying to refactor Nix into something more modular and flexible, they were aiming to make a new implementation from scratch.
> More recently, in https://tvl.fyi/blog/tvix-status-september-22 they lay out a basic approach of two projects:

Author: ```suggestion
[TVL announced](https://tvl.fyi/blog/rewriting-nix) that, frustrated in trying to refactor Nix into something more modular and flexible, they were aiming to make a new implementation from scratch.
More recently, [they lay out a basic approach](https://tvl.fyi/blog/tvix-status-september-22) of two projects:
```

- [*Tvix*](https://cs.tvl.fyi/depot/-/tree/tvix) is a new implementation of the Nix language evaluator,

- [*go-nix*](https://github.com/nix-community/go-nix) is a new implementation of the store layer.

First of all, the fact that they are planning on two completely separate implementation oriented around this same "narrow waist" is testament to the appeal of the design.

Second of all, note that per they have separate, orthogonal experiments they wish to run on both sides of the store interface divide.
Above, they want to experiment with radically different evaluation strategies, especially to speed up Nixpkgs evaluation.
Below, they want to experiment with the standardized containerization technologies that already exist for new ways of sandboxing and distributing builds with less bespoke Nix-specific code.

> They also want to apply the layering paradigm *within* go-nix, fostering even more modularity.

Reviewer 10: Where do you get all of this info about go-nix (e.g. what they want to experiment with, and where)? I can't find it in the links you mention.

Author: Taking on https://matrix.to/#/!YUnRYAzgytLSZbBhbx:hackint.org more information should be published soon after which I'll update the RFC to link it.

Author: https://code.tvl.fyi/about/tvix/docs/components.md I'll update this once I can get permalink.

I think these are great goals, and for the sake of the ecosystem as a whole, it should be as easy as possible to run such new experiments.
In particular, a novel evaluator should be usable with the standard C++ Nix store layer, and a novel store layer should be reusable with the standard C++ Nix evaluator.

Yes, strictly speaking, we only need a stable daemon protocol to accommodate that goal, which we have.
But ensuring the C++ Nix components can be built separately for use in isolation further send the message that such experimentation is *good* and *welcomed*.
Messaging matters, and making our layered architecture "official" as this RFC proposes I think sends a better message.

### Guix

> Guix is more diverged from Nix than Tvix + go-nix, and thus hints more at the end breadth of the design space yet to be explored.

Reviewer 3: TVL has taught me an excellent software engineering trick: if you want to ensure a clean separation between two parts of your codebase, write the two parts in two different languages whose communities see each other as competitors.

Absolutely brilliant; I tip my hat to these folks for figuring that out. :)

> The store layer is the same, but the layers above, instead of being a implementing of the Nix language, is a completely different design with Guile Scheme.

Reviewer 3: I heard that Guix started out using a store format which was compatible with Nix's `libstore` (presumably so they could use the Nix tools to bootstrap their development process) but that their store is no longer perfectly compatible.

If this is true, does anybody know what motivated them to diverge?  Or did they simply not adopt some forward-incompatible change that Nix made to its store format?

Making a stand-alone Nix store executable demonstrates we are serious about layering and serious about standardizing that layer, and not just trying to get Guix users to use Nix instead.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

The goals motivated above a broken down into small steps that we can execute in isolation.
This keeps the cost of this work initially lower, and generally reduces risk.

## 1. The split itself

Allow building a store-only version of Nix.
This is a Nix executable that links `libstore` but not `libfetchers`, or `libexpr`.
Plenty of commands like `nix daemon`, `nix log`, and the `nix store` sub-commands don't care about evaluation, fetching, or flakes at all.
https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/6182 is a draft PR implementing this, splitting `libcmd` into two parts so the CLI code reused.
We will finish it off with as many commands as are reasonable to include, and merge it.

Initially, we can test this store-only version of Nix with no changes to the test suite, by running full Nix with the store-only Nix's daemon.
Support for testing Nix against a separately-built daemon already exists and is in use today.

> The store-only Nix and its tests should be built as part of CI, as "first class" as our existing CI jobs.

Reviewer 7: I see no reason to emphasize this.
```suggestion
The store-only Nix and its tests should be built as part of CI.
```

Reviewer 2: Just out of curiosity: What is the general perception of what the CI of Nix is? Can you point at it? I've heard different answers to that question over the years.

> That means both in the channel-blocking Hydra eval, and per PR.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
That means both in the channel-blocking Hydra evaluation, and for each pull request.
```

> If we hit the limits of Github Actions in per-PR CI, we should consider using Hydra instead / in addition, something that has already been discussed.

Reviewer 7: Please link where it has been discussed.

```suggestion
If we hit the limits of Github Actions in per-pull-request CI, we should consider using Hydra instead or in addition, something that has already been discussed.
```

Author: ```suggestion
If we hit the limits of GitHub Actions in per-PR CI, we should consider using Hydra instead / in addition to GitHub Actions, something that has already been discussed.
```

## 2. Manual

> It should be possible to build a store-only manual without information on the other layers too.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
It should be possible to build a store-only manual without information on the other layers, too.
```

This would be the manual that is distributed with the store-only Nix.

> Of course, store-only and full  can share sections, so we aren't duplicating work.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Of course, store-only and full Nix can share sections, so we aren't duplicating work.
```

## 3. Website

> The fully and store-only version of Nix should both be presented for download on the website.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The full and store-only version of Nix should both be presented for download on the website.
```

This should be just like how Plasma, Gnome, and headless installer images for NixOS are all offered.

## 4. Store-specific Tests

The current test suite uses Nix language for most tests of store-layer functionality.
We should write new tests that don't use the Nix language.
E.g. we might create a `read-derivation` complement of `show-derivation` that accepts a nicer JSON representation of a derivation as input.
This will allow the store-only Nix to be tested in isolation, but these tests can also be used with full Nix.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

## Maximal Nix unlike today

> I cannot emphasize this enough, but the interface of maximal store+exprs+flakes Nix remains *exactly* like today.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The interface of maximal Nix, including the store, the Nix language, and flakes, remains *exactly* like today.
```

In particular, lower level commands can be used with higher level "installables" (arguments), so e.g.
```
nix show-derivation flake#bar
```

> will still work.

Reviewer 8: Should implementation of this be migrated to a model where no executable links `libstore` and `libexpr` at once, and the CLI executable invokes the store-only backend (possibly for multiple stores as in case of `nix copy`)?

Author: I think I lean against that, but regardless I would defer such questions until after this RFC and this first step. If we can be sure full Nix stays the same in the short run, that makes this a lot less risky — hardly any risk at all, I think.

> 
> ## Good tasks anyways!
> 
> Lots of the plan above I think is good work we should be doing anyways, regardless of whether we expose a store-only Nix.
> If you believe this, then the "cost" of this RFC is a lot less.

Reviewer 7: I don't think that's relevant.

```suggestion
```

### Tests

Splitting the test suite per natural layer of the implementation is good work because it combines the specificity of unit tests with the real-world-ness of integration tests.

> "entire kitchen sink" tests make it harder to narrow down root causes of failures.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
"Entire kitchen sink" tests make it harder to narrow down root causes of failures.
```

### Manual

> The documentation team is already working to clean up the manual, and this effort already involves emphasizing layering.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The documentation team is already working to clean up the manual, and this effort already involves emphasizing the architecture.
```

So whether we formally make a store-only Nix or not, I suspect the overhauled manual will natural have easy boundaries from which to "extract" the store-only manual.

## Security

The daemon is a privileged process.
Even if with upcoming changes it shouldn't need root, it does tasks like administrating OS sandboxes correctly which still are security-critical.
Having less code in the story-only Nix daemon, even if we think the removed code was "dead anyways" is always good.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Creating new teams, trying to build ties with other communities sounds scary.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

Do programming parts without the documentation and website parts.
But that feels to me like turning an ongoing shift in focus to a one-off change that is likely to bit-rot.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

> What should the store-only Nix be called?

Reviewer 7: `nix-store`

Reviewer 6: I don't think we _need_ to decide on a new name. It could be just a build configuration of the already named components. 
For an analogy, in Nixpkgs both `docker` and `docker-client` packages provide the `docker` command, both of which are produced by the same package function.

On the other hand, renaming would be a nice gesture, if we drop `nix` from the names: `libstore`, `store add-file FILE`, etc.

Reviewer 4: I've been liking:
- store: only the store layer
- nix: includes nix language
- flake: include flakes concepts

Reviewer 11: I agree with @roberth's idea of not needing a rename. For the purposes of somebody wanting to make sure they only depend on the store-only Nix, we can have `nix --version` indicate that it's a store-only Nix.

Author: Moved to future work in 3194ad43a5c302b5b261eafb25c0f1426203dbee. If everyone is good with that we can mark this thread resolved.

# Future work
[future]: #future-work

## Nix Store Team

Now that we have this division in the implementation, we also have the opportunity to leverage it for governance purposes.

> An official, NixOS-foundation-authorized team could be set up to manage store layer design decisions (below the threshold of needing an RFC) that don't effect that the rest of Nix.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An official, NixOS-foundation-authorized team could be set up to manage store layer design decisions (below the threshold of needing an RFC) that don't affect that the rest of Nix.
```

> \[Some sort of decision that affect all layers is out of scope, must be deliberated with stakeholders from other layers too, probably should be RFC due to such large scope.\]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Decisions that would affect all layers is out of scope for that team, must be deliberated with stakeholders from other layers too, and probably should be RFCs.
```

> To be clear, this is to say we should abandon the idea of Nix as a whole.

Reviewer: Missing negation?

Author: Haha, yes.

Reviewer 12: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freudian_slip :thinking:

> To be clear, this is to say we should abandon the idea of Nix as a whole.

Author: ```suggestion
To be clear, this is *not* to say we should abandon the idea of Nix as a whole.
```

There can still be governance of Nix as a whole; this team, and similar hypothetical, say, Flakes, Nix language, or User Experience teams would ultimately need to report to.

> The goal is not to overreact, but strike a balance between:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The goal is to strike a balance between:
```

1. Making sure Nix as a whole continues to make sense

> 2. Make sure layers make sense in isolation not just in the context of the way they are currently used.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
2. Make sure layers make sense in isolation, and not just in the context of the way they are currently used.
```

> ## Standardization across projects

Reviewer 13: Have you reached out to Guix yet? Or if not, when do you think it would be valuable to get their input?

Author: I have! But I think for this RFC the ball is purely in our court. This RFC is not about making technical decisions that would impact Guix, but about ratifying the idea of a store layer that is usable in arbitrary ways including the Nix language and Scheme via Guix.

I'll continue talking to them, and I encourage anyone else that wants to reach and say hi too — let's build more bridges between our communities — but if we don't do something like this I don't see why they should take us very seriously about store layer interop.

> If we establish informal interop across store-layer implementations with Guix, a next step would be establish some sort of living standard that both communities have equal say in.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If we establish informal interoperability across store-layer implementations with Guix, a next step would be establish some sort of living standard that both communities have equal say in.
```

(Of course, implementations are free to implement features in excess of what the standard requires!)

A new store team, per the above, could lead the process from our end, since the other parts of Nix are not shared with Guix and thus out of scope for this sort of cross-project standardization.

> ## Stabilization
> 
> There is a looming question on how to stabilize Nix's big backlog of unstable features (New CLI, Flakes).
> There is a lot of bad-blood over Flakes, both the feature itself and the way it has been rolled out.
> I think the stabilization process can be an opportunity to heal old wounds.
> 
> At a minimum, this can involve stabilizing the new CLI before Flakes.
> But even that that is a lot of new feature surface area to review.
> I think even better is stabilizing just the store-only new CLI first.
> 
> This is easily the least controversial part of our unstable feature backlog, and yet there is still plenty to discuss.
> Questions like
> 
> - logging
> - store paths on `stdout` at end of build?
> - Should commands like `show-derivation` should use `--json` by default
> - Flat vs hierarchical commands
> - is `--derivation` a good flag? (I think not!)
> 
> are all in-scope.
> 
> Having a conversation just on this narrow first batch of stabilization both builds trust, and ensures these still-important issues they aren't lost in flame wars over more divisive topics.

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure how this part relates to the rest. I suppose the topics listed would be interesting for a potential Nix Store Team to take care of, and maybe you can salvage just that list and an introductory note.
```suggestion
```
